docs/apache-airflow/concepts/operators.rst, before:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Operators
=========

An Operator is conceptually a template for a predefined :doc:`Task <tasks>`, that you can just define declaratively inside your DAG::

    with DAG("my-dag") as dag:
        ping = SimpleHttpOperator(endpoint="http://example.com/update/")
        email = EmailOperator(to="admin@example.com", subject="Update complete")

        ping >> email

Airflow has a very extensive set of operators available, with some built-in to the core or pre-installed providers. Some popular operators from core include:

- :class:`~airflow.operators.bash.BashOperator` - executes a bash command
- :class:`~airflow.operators.python.PythonOperator` - calls an arbitrary Python function
- :class:`~airflow.operators.email.EmailOperator` - sends an email

For a list of all core operators, see: :doc:`Core Operators and Hooks Reference </operators-and-hooks-ref>`.

If the operator you need isn't installed with Airflow by default, you can probably find it as part of our huge set of community :doc:`provider packages <apache-airflow-providers:index>`. Some popular operators from here include:

- :class:`~airflow.providers.http.operators.http.SimpleHttpOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.mysql.operators.mysql.MySqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.postgres.operators.postgres.PostgresOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.microsoft.mssql.operators.mssql.MsSqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.oracle.operators.oracle.OracleOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.jdbc.operators.jdbc.JdbcOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.docker.operators.docker.DockerOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.apache.hive.operators.hive.HiveOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.amazon.aws.operators.s3_file_transform.S3FileTransformOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.mysql.transfers.presto_to_mysql.PrestoToMySqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.slack.operators.slack.SlackAPIOperator`

But there are many, many more - you can see the full list of all community-managed operators, hooks, sensors
and transfers in our
:doc:`providers packages <apache-airflow-providers:operators-and-hooks-ref/index>` documentation.

.. note::

    Inside Airflow's code, we often mix the concepts of :doc:`tasks` and Operators, and they are mostly
    interchangeable. However, when we talk about a *Task*, we mean the generic "unit of execution" of a
    DAG; when we talk about an *Operator*, we mean a reusable, pre-made Task template whose logic
    is all done for you and that just needs some arguments.


.. _concepts:jinja-templating:

Jinja Templating
----------------
Airflow leverages the power of `Jinja Templating <http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/dev/>`_ and this can be a powerful tool to use in combination with :ref:`macros <templates-ref>`.

For example, say you want to pass the execution date as an environment variable to a Bash script using the ``BashOperator``:

.. code-block:: python

  # The execution date as YYYY-MM-DD
  date = "{{ ds }}"
  t = BashOperator(
      task_id="test_env",
      bash_command="/tmp/test.sh ",
      dag=dag,
      env={"EXECUTION_DATE": date},
  )

Here, ``{{ ds }}`` is a templated variable, and because the ``env`` parameter of the ``BashOperator`` is templated with Jinja, the execution date will be available as an environment variable named ``EXECUTION_DATE`` in your Bash script.

You can use Jinja templating with every parameter that is marked as "templated" in the documentation. Template substitution occurs just before the ``pre_execute`` function of your operator is called.

You can also use Jinja templating with nested fields, as long as these nested fields are marked as templated in the structure they belong to: fields registered in ``template_fields`` property will be submitted to template substitution, like the ``path`` field in the example below:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyDataReader:
        template_fields = ["path"]

        def __init__(self, my_path):
            self.path = my_path

        # [additional code here...]


    t = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform_data",
        python_callable=transform_data,
        op_args=[MyDataReader("/tmp/{{ ds }}/my_file")],
        dag=dag,
    )

.. note:: The ``template_fields`` property can equally be a class variable or an instance variable.

Deep nested fields can also be substituted, as long as all intermediate fields are marked as template fields:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyDataTransformer:
        template_fields = ["reader"]

        def __init__(self, my_reader):
            self.reader = my_reader

        # [additional code here...]


    class MyDataReader:
        template_fields = ["path"]

        def __init__(self, my_path):
            self.path = my_path

        # [additional code here...]


    t = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform_data",
        python_callable=transform_data,
        op_args=[MyDataTransformer(MyDataReader("/tmp/{{ ds }}/my_file"))],
        dag=dag,
    )

You can pass custom options to the Jinja ``Environment`` when creating your DAG. One common usage is to avoid Jinja from dropping a trailing newline from a template string:

.. code-block:: python

    my_dag = DAG(
        dag_id="my-dag",
        jinja_environment_kwargs={
            "keep_trailing_newline": True,
            # some other jinja2 Environment options here
        },
    )

See the `Jinja documentation <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/api/#jinja2.Environment>`_ to find all available options.

Rendering Fields as Native Python Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, all the ``template_fields`` are rendered as strings.

Example, let's say ``extract`` task pushes a dictionary
(Example: ``{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}``) to :ref:`XCom <concepts:xcom>` table.
Now, when the following task is run, ``order_data`` argument is passed a string, example:
``'{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}'``.

.. code-block:: python

    transform = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform",
        op_kwargs={"order_data": "{{ti.xcom_pull('extract')}}"},
        python_callable=transform,
    )


If you instead want the rendered template field to return a Native Python object (``dict`` in our example),
you can pass ``render_template_as_native_obj=True`` to the DAG as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    dag = DAG(
        dag_id="example_template_as_python_object",
        schedule_interval=None,
        start_date=days_ago(2),
        render_template_as_native_obj=True,
    )


    def extract():
        data_string = '{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}'
        return json.loads(data_string)


    def transform(order_data):
        print(type(order_data))
        for value in order_data.values():
            total_order_value += value
        return {"total_order_value": total_order_value}


    extract_task = PythonOperator(task_id="extract", python_callable=extract)

    transform_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform",
        op_kwargs={"order_data": "{{ti.xcom_pull('extract')}}"},
        python_callable=transform,
    )

    extract_task >> transform_task

In this case, ``order_data`` argument is passed: ``{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}``.

Airflow uses Jinja's `NativeEnvironment <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/nativetypes/>`_
when ``render_template_as_native_obj`` is set to ``True``.
With ``NativeEnvironment``, rendering a template produces a native Python type.

Commit message:

Remove execution date reference in docs
Not all usages can be removed, unfortunately, since there are still many
usages requiring the value, especially in Python APIs.

This also adds additional values for Sentry tags and Elastic log
filenames based on data interval instead of execution date, so the user
can migrate as soon as possible, even if we have not changed the default.

docs/apache-airflow/concepts/operators.rst, after:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Operators
=========

An Operator is conceptually a template for a predefined :doc:`Task <tasks>`, that you can just define declaratively inside your DAG::

    with DAG("my-dag") as dag:
        ping = SimpleHttpOperator(endpoint="http://example.com/update/")
        email = EmailOperator(to="admin@example.com", subject="Update complete")

        ping >> email

Airflow has a very extensive set of operators available, with some built-in to the core or pre-installed providers. Some popular operators from core include:

- :class:`~airflow.operators.bash.BashOperator` - executes a bash command
- :class:`~airflow.operators.python.PythonOperator` - calls an arbitrary Python function
- :class:`~airflow.operators.email.EmailOperator` - sends an email

For a list of all core operators, see: :doc:`Core Operators and Hooks Reference </operators-and-hooks-ref>`.

If the operator you need isn't installed with Airflow by default, you can probably find it as part of our huge set of community :doc:`provider packages <apache-airflow-providers:index>`. Some popular operators from here include:

- :class:`~airflow.providers.http.operators.http.SimpleHttpOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.mysql.operators.mysql.MySqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.postgres.operators.postgres.PostgresOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.microsoft.mssql.operators.mssql.MsSqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.oracle.operators.oracle.OracleOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.jdbc.operators.jdbc.JdbcOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.docker.operators.docker.DockerOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.apache.hive.operators.hive.HiveOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.amazon.aws.operators.s3_file_transform.S3FileTransformOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.mysql.transfers.presto_to_mysql.PrestoToMySqlOperator`
- :class:`~airflow.providers.slack.operators.slack.SlackAPIOperator`

But there are many, many more - you can see the full list of all community-managed operators, hooks, sensors
and transfers in our
:doc:`providers packages <apache-airflow-providers:operators-and-hooks-ref/index>` documentation.

.. note::

    Inside Airflow's code, we often mix the concepts of :doc:`tasks` and Operators, and they are mostly
    interchangeable. However, when we talk about a *Task*, we mean the generic "unit of execution" of a
    DAG; when we talk about an *Operator*, we mean a reusable, pre-made Task template whose logic
    is all done for you and that just needs some arguments.


.. _concepts:jinja-templating:

Jinja Templating
----------------
Airflow leverages the power of `Jinja Templating <http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/dev/>`_ and this can be a powerful tool to use in combination with :ref:`macros <templates-ref>`.

For example, say you want to pass the start of the data interval as an environment variable to a Bash script using the ``BashOperator``:

.. code-block:: python

  # The start of the data interval as YYYY-MM-DD
  date = "{{ ds }}"
  t = BashOperator(
      task_id="test_env",
      bash_command="/tmp/test.sh ",
      dag=dag,
      env={"DATA_INTERVAL_START": date},
  )

Here, ``{{ ds }}`` is a templated variable, and because the ``env`` parameter of the ``BashOperator`` is templated with Jinja, the data interval's start date will be available as an environment variable named ``DATA_INTERVAL_START`` in your Bash script.

You can use Jinja templating with every parameter that is marked as "templated" in the documentation. Template substitution occurs just before the ``pre_execute`` function of your operator is called.

You can also use Jinja templating with nested fields, as long as these nested fields are marked as templated in the structure they belong to: fields registered in ``template_fields`` property will be submitted to template substitution, like the ``path`` field in the example below:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyDataReader:
        template_fields = ["path"]

        def __init__(self, my_path):
            self.path = my_path

        # [additional code here...]


    t = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform_data",
        python_callable=transform_data,
        op_args=[MyDataReader("/tmp/{{ ds }}/my_file")],
        dag=dag,
    )

.. note:: The ``template_fields`` property can equally be a class variable or an instance variable.

Deep nested fields can also be substituted, as long as all intermediate fields are marked as template fields:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyDataTransformer:
        template_fields = ["reader"]

        def __init__(self, my_reader):
            self.reader = my_reader

        # [additional code here...]


    class MyDataReader:
        template_fields = ["path"]

        def __init__(self, my_path):
            self.path = my_path

        # [additional code here...]


    t = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform_data",
        python_callable=transform_data,
        op_args=[MyDataTransformer(MyDataReader("/tmp/{{ ds }}/my_file"))],
        dag=dag,
    )

You can pass custom options to the Jinja ``Environment`` when creating your DAG. One common usage is to avoid Jinja from dropping a trailing newline from a template string:

.. code-block:: python

    my_dag = DAG(
        dag_id="my-dag",
        jinja_environment_kwargs={
            "keep_trailing_newline": True,
            # some other jinja2 Environment options here
        },
    )

See the `Jinja documentation <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/api/#jinja2.Environment>`_ to find all available options.

Rendering Fields as Native Python Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, all the ``template_fields`` are rendered as strings.

Example, let's say ``extract`` task pushes a dictionary
(Example: ``{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}``) to :ref:`XCom <concepts:xcom>` table.
Now, when the following task is run, ``order_data`` argument is passed a string, example:
``'{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}'``.

.. code-block:: python

    transform = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform",
        op_kwargs={"order_data": "{{ti.xcom_pull('extract')}}"},
        python_callable=transform,
    )


If you instead want the rendered template field to return a Native Python object (``dict`` in our example),
you can pass ``render_template_as_native_obj=True`` to the DAG as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    dag = DAG(
        dag_id="example_template_as_python_object",
        schedule_interval=None,
        start_date=days_ago(2),
        render_template_as_native_obj=True,
    )


    def extract():
        data_string = '{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}'
        return json.loads(data_string)


    def transform(order_data):
        print(type(order_data))
        for value in order_data.values():
            total_order_value += value
        return {"total_order_value": total_order_value}


    extract_task = PythonOperator(task_id="extract", python_callable=extract)

    transform_task = PythonOperator(
        task_id="transform",
        op_kwargs={"order_data": "{{ti.xcom_pull('extract')}}"},
        python_callable=transform,
    )

    extract_task >> transform_task

In this case, ``order_data`` argument is passed: ``{"1001": 301.27, "1002": 433.21, "1003": 502.22}``.

Airflow uses Jinja's `NativeEnvironment <https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/nativetypes/>`_
when ``render_template_as_native_obj`` is set to ``True``.
With ``NativeEnvironment``, rendering a template produces a native Python type.
