docs/apache-airflow/concepts/scheduler.rst, before:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

.. _scheduler:

Scheduler
==========

The Airflow scheduler monitors all tasks and DAGs, then triggers the
task instances once their dependencies are complete. Behind the scenes,
the scheduler spins up a subprocess, which monitors and stays in sync with all
DAGs in the specified DAG directory. Once per minute, by default, the scheduler
collects DAG parsing results and checks whether any active tasks can be triggered.

The Airflow scheduler is designed to run as a persistent service in an
Airflow production environment. To kick it off, all you need to do is
execute the ``airflow scheduler`` command. It uses the configuration specified in
``airflow.cfg``.

The scheduler uses the configured :doc:`Executor </executor/index>` to run tasks that are ready.

To start a scheduler, simply run the command:

.. code-block:: bash

    airflow scheduler

Your DAGs will start executing once the scheduler is running successfully.

.. note::

    The first DAG Run is created based on the minimum ``start_date`` for the tasks in your DAG.
    Subsequent DAG Runs are created by the scheduler process, based on your DAG’s ``schedule_interval``,
    sequentially.


The scheduler won't trigger your tasks until the period it covers has ended e.g., A job with ``schedule_interval`` set as ``@daily`` runs after the day
has ended. This technique makes sure that whatever data is required for that period is fully available before the dag is executed.
In the UI, it appears as if Airflow is running your tasks a day **late**

.. note::

    If you run a DAG on a ``schedule_interval`` of one day, the run with ``execution_date`` ``2019-11-21`` triggers soon after ``2019-11-21T23:59``.

    **Let’s Repeat That**, the scheduler runs your job one ``schedule_interval`` AFTER the start date, at the END of the period.

    You should refer to :doc:`/dag-run` for details on scheduling a DAG.

Triggering DAG with Future Date
-------------------------------

If you want to use 'external trigger' to run future-dated execution dates, set ``allow_trigger_in_future = True`` in ``scheduler`` section in ``airflow.cfg``.
This only has effect if your DAG has no ``schedule_interval``.
If you keep default ``allow_trigger_in_future = False`` and try 'external trigger' to run future-dated execution dates,
the scheduler won't execute it now but the scheduler will execute it in the future once the current date rolls over to the execution date.

.. _scheduler:ha:

Running More Than One Scheduler
-------------------------------

.. versionadded: 2.0.0

Airflow supports running more than one scheduler concurrently -- both for performance reasons and for
resiliency.

Overview
""""""""

The :abbr:`HA (highly available)` scheduler is designed to take advantage of the existing metadata database.
This was primarily done for operational simplicity: every component already has to speak to this DB, and by
not using direct communication or consensus algorithm between schedulers (Raft, Paxos, etc.) nor another
consensus tool (Apache Zookeeper, or Consul for instance) we have kept the "operational surface area" to a
minimum.

The scheduler now uses the serialized DAG representation to make its scheduling decisions and the rough
outline of the scheduling loop is:

- Check for any DAGs needing a new DagRun, and create them
- Examine a batch of DagRuns for schedulable TaskInstances or complete DagRuns
- Select schedulable TaskInstances, and whilst respecting Pool limits and other concurrency limits, enqueue
  them for execution

This does however place some requirements on the Database.

.. _scheduler:ha:db_requirements:

Database Requirements
"""""""""""""""""""""

The short version is that users of PostgreSQL 9.6+ or MySQL 8+ are all ready to go -- you can start running as
many copies of the scheduler as you like -- there is no further set up or config options needed. If you are
using a different database please read on.

To maintain performance and throughput there is one part of the scheduling loop that does a number of
calculations in memory (because having to round-trip to the DB for each TaskInstance would be too slow) so we
need to ensure that only a single scheduler is in this critical section at once - otherwise limits would not
be correctly respected. To achieve this we use database row-level locks (using ``SELECT ... FOR UPDATE``).

This critical section is where TaskInstances go from scheduled state and are enqueued to the executor, whilst
ensuring the various concurrency and pool limits are respected. The critical section is obtained by asking for
a row-level write lock on every row of the Pool table (roughly equivalent to ``SELECT * FROM slot_pool FOR
UPDATE NOWAIT`` but the exact query is slightly different).

The following databases are fully supported and provide an "optimal" experience:

- PostgreSQL 9.6+
- MySQL 8+

.. warning::

  MariaDB did not implement the ``SKIP LOCKED`` or ``NOWAIT`` SQL clauses until version
  `10.6.0 <https://jira.mariadb.org/browse/MDEV-25433>`_.
  Without these features, running multiple schedulers is not supported and deadlock errors have been reported. MariaDB
  10.6.0 and following may work appropriately with multiple schedulers, but this has not been tested.

.. warning::

  MySQL 5.x does not support ``SKIP LOCKED`` or ``NOWAIT``, and additionally is more prone to deciding
  queries are deadlocked, so running with more than a single scheduler on MySQL 5.x is not supported or
  recommended.

.. note::

  Microsoft SQLServer has not been tested with HA.

.. _scheduler:ha:tunables:

Scheduler Tuneables
"""""""""""""""""""

The following config settings can be used to control aspects of the Scheduler HA loop.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__max_dagruns_to_create_per_loop`

  This changes the number of dags that are locked by each scheduler when
  creating dag runs. One possible reason for setting this lower is if you
  have huge dags and are running multiple schedules, you won't want one
  scheduler to do all the work.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__max_dagruns_per_loop_to_schedule`

  How many DagRuns should a scheduler examine (and lock) when scheduling
  and queuing tasks. Increasing this limit will allow more throughput for
  smaller DAGs but will likely slow down throughput for larger (>500
  tasks for example) DAGs. Setting this too high when using multiple
  schedulers could also lead to one scheduler taking all the dag runs
  leaving no work for the others.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__use_row_level_locking`

  Should the scheduler issue ``SELECT ... FOR UPDATE`` in relevant queries.
  If this is set to False then you should not run more than a single
  scheduler at once

- :ref:`config:scheduler__pool_metrics_interval`

  How often (in seconds) should pool usage stats be sent to statsd (if
  statsd_on is enabled). This is a *relatively* expensive query to compute
  this, so this should be set to match the same period as your statsd roll-up
  period.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__orphaned_tasks_check_interval`

  How often (in seconds) should the scheduler check for orphaned tasks or dead
  SchedulerJobs.

  This setting controls how a dead scheduler will be noticed and the tasks it
  was "supervising" get picked up by another scheduler. (The tasks will stay
  running, so there is no harm in not detecting this for a while.)

  When a SchedulerJob is detected as "dead" (as determined by
  :ref:`config:scheduler__scheduler_health_check_threshold`) any running or
  queued tasks that were launched by the dead process will be "adopted" and
  monitored by this scheduler instead.

Commit message:

Remove execution date reference in docs
Not all usages can be removed, unfortunately, since there are still many
usages requiring the value, especially in Python APIs.

This also adds additional values for Sentry tags and Elastic log
filenames based on data interval instead of execution date, so the user
can migrate as soon as possible, even if we have not changed the default.

docs/apache-airflow/concepts/scheduler.rst, after:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

.. _scheduler:

Scheduler
==========

The Airflow scheduler monitors all tasks and DAGs, then triggers the
task instances once their dependencies are complete. Behind the scenes,
the scheduler spins up a subprocess, which monitors and stays in sync with all
DAGs in the specified DAG directory. Once per minute, by default, the scheduler
collects DAG parsing results and checks whether any active tasks can be triggered.

The Airflow scheduler is designed to run as a persistent service in an
Airflow production environment. To kick it off, all you need to do is
execute the ``airflow scheduler`` command. It uses the configuration specified in
``airflow.cfg``.

The scheduler uses the configured :doc:`Executor </executor/index>` to run tasks that are ready.

To start a scheduler, simply run the command:

.. code-block:: bash

    airflow scheduler

Your DAGs will start executing once the scheduler is running successfully.

.. note::

    The first DAG Run is created based on the minimum ``start_date`` for the tasks in your DAG.
    Subsequent DAG Runs are created by the scheduler process, based on your DAG’s ``schedule_interval``,
    sequentially.


The scheduler won't trigger your tasks until the period it covers has ended e.g., A job with ``schedule_interval`` set as ``@daily`` runs after the day
has ended. This technique makes sure that whatever data is required for that period is fully available before the dag is executed.
In the UI, it appears as if Airflow is running your tasks a day **late**

.. note::

    If you run a DAG on a ``schedule_interval`` of one day, the run with data interval starting on ``2019-11-21`` triggers after ``2019-11-21T23:59``.

    **Let’s Repeat That**, the scheduler runs your job one ``schedule_interval`` AFTER the start date, at the END of the interval.

    You should refer to :doc:`/dag-run` for details on scheduling a DAG.

Triggering DAG with Future Date
-------------------------------

If you want to use 'external trigger' to run future-dated data intervals, set ``allow_trigger_in_future = True`` in ``scheduler`` section in ``airflow.cfg``.
This only has effect if your DAG has no ``schedule_interval``.
If you keep default ``allow_trigger_in_future = False`` and try 'external trigger' to run future-dated data intervals,
the scheduler won't execute it now but the scheduler will execute it in the future once the current date rolls over to the start of the data interval.

.. _scheduler:ha:

Running More Than One Scheduler
-------------------------------

.. versionadded: 2.0.0

Airflow supports running more than one scheduler concurrently -- both for performance reasons and for
resiliency.

Overview
""""""""

The :abbr:`HA (highly available)` scheduler is designed to take advantage of the existing metadata database.
This was primarily done for operational simplicity: every component already has to speak to this DB, and by
not using direct communication or consensus algorithm between schedulers (Raft, Paxos, etc.) nor another
consensus tool (Apache Zookeeper, or Consul for instance) we have kept the "operational surface area" to a
minimum.

The scheduler now uses the serialized DAG representation to make its scheduling decisions and the rough
outline of the scheduling loop is:

- Check for any DAGs needing a new DagRun, and create them
- Examine a batch of DagRuns for schedulable TaskInstances or complete DagRuns
- Select schedulable TaskInstances, and whilst respecting Pool limits and other concurrency limits, enqueue
  them for execution

This does however place some requirements on the Database.

.. _scheduler:ha:db_requirements:

Database Requirements
"""""""""""""""""""""

The short version is that users of PostgreSQL 9.6+ or MySQL 8+ are all ready to go -- you can start running as
many copies of the scheduler as you like -- there is no further set up or config options needed. If you are
using a different database please read on.

To maintain performance and throughput there is one part of the scheduling loop that does a number of
calculations in memory (because having to round-trip to the DB for each TaskInstance would be too slow) so we
need to ensure that only a single scheduler is in this critical section at once - otherwise limits would not
be correctly respected. To achieve this we use database row-level locks (using ``SELECT ... FOR UPDATE``).

This critical section is where TaskInstances go from scheduled state and are enqueued to the executor, whilst
ensuring the various concurrency and pool limits are respected. The critical section is obtained by asking for
a row-level write lock on every row of the Pool table (roughly equivalent to ``SELECT * FROM slot_pool FOR
UPDATE NOWAIT`` but the exact query is slightly different).

The following databases are fully supported and provide an "optimal" experience:

- PostgreSQL 9.6+
- MySQL 8+

.. warning::

  MariaDB did not implement the ``SKIP LOCKED`` or ``NOWAIT`` SQL clauses until version
  `10.6.0 <https://jira.mariadb.org/browse/MDEV-25433>`_.
  Without these features, running multiple schedulers is not supported and deadlock errors have been reported. MariaDB
  10.6.0 and following may work appropriately with multiple schedulers, but this has not been tested.

.. warning::

  MySQL 5.x does not support ``SKIP LOCKED`` or ``NOWAIT``, and additionally is more prone to deciding
  queries are deadlocked, so running with more than a single scheduler on MySQL 5.x is not supported or
  recommended.

.. note::

  Microsoft SQLServer has not been tested with HA.

.. _scheduler:ha:tunables:

Scheduler Tuneables
"""""""""""""""""""

The following config settings can be used to control aspects of the Scheduler HA loop.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__max_dagruns_to_create_per_loop`

  This changes the number of dags that are locked by each scheduler when
  creating dag runs. One possible reason for setting this lower is if you
  have huge dags and are running multiple schedules, you won't want one
  scheduler to do all the work.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__max_dagruns_per_loop_to_schedule`

  How many DagRuns should a scheduler examine (and lock) when scheduling
  and queuing tasks. Increasing this limit will allow more throughput for
  smaller DAGs but will likely slow down throughput for larger (>500
  tasks for example) DAGs. Setting this too high when using multiple
  schedulers could also lead to one scheduler taking all the dag runs
  leaving no work for the others.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__use_row_level_locking`

  Should the scheduler issue ``SELECT ... FOR UPDATE`` in relevant queries.
  If this is set to False then you should not run more than a single
  scheduler at once

- :ref:`config:scheduler__pool_metrics_interval`

  How often (in seconds) should pool usage stats be sent to statsd (if
  statsd_on is enabled). This is a *relatively* expensive query to compute
  this, so this should be set to match the same period as your statsd roll-up
  period.

- :ref:`config:scheduler__orphaned_tasks_check_interval`

  How often (in seconds) should the scheduler check for orphaned tasks or dead
  SchedulerJobs.

  This setting controls how a dead scheduler will be noticed and the tasks it
  was "supervising" get picked up by another scheduler. (The tasks will stay
  running, so there is no harm in not detecting this for a while.)

  When a SchedulerJob is detected as "dead" (as determined by
  :ref:`config:scheduler__scheduler_health_check_threshold`) any running or
  queued tasks that were launched by the dead process will be "adopted" and
  monitored by this scheduler instead.
