docs/apache-airflow/logging-monitoring/errors.rst, before:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Error Tracking
===============

Airflow can be set up to send errors to `Sentry <https://docs.sentry.io/>`__.

Setup
------

First you must install sentry requirement:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install 'apache-airflow[sentry]'

After that, you need to enable the integration by set ``sentry_on`` option in ``[sentry]`` section to ``"True"``.

Add your ``SENTRY_DSN`` to your configuration file e.g. ``airflow.cfg`` in ``[sentry]`` section. Its template resembles the following: ``'{PROTOCOL}://{PUBLIC_KEY}@{HOST}/{PROJECT_ID}'``

.. code-block:: ini

    [sentry]
    sentry_dsn = http://foo@sentry.io/123

.. note::
    If this value is not provided, the SDK will try to read it from the ``SENTRY_DSN`` environment variable.

You can supply `additional configuration options <https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/python/configuration/options>`__ based on the Python platform via ``[sentry]`` section.
Unsupported options: ``integrations``, ``in_app_include``, ``in_app_exclude``, ``ignore_errors``, ``before_breadcrumb``, ``before_send``, ``transport``.

Tags
-----

======================================= ==================================================
Name                                    Description
======================================= ==================================================
``dag_id``                              Dag name of the dag that failed
``task_id``                             Task name of the task that failed
``execution_date``                      Execution date when the task failed
``operator``                            Operator name of the task that failed
======================================= ==================================================

Breadcrumbs
------------


When a task fails with an error `breadcrumbs <https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/python/enriching-events/breadcrumbs/>`__ will be added for the other tasks in the current dag run.

======================================= ==============================================================
Name                                    Description
======================================= ==============================================================
``completed_tasks[task_id]``            Task ID of task that executed before failed task
``completed_tasks[state]``              Final state of task that executed before failed task (only Success and Failed states are captured)
``completed_tasks[operator]``           Task operator of task that executed before failed task
``completed_tasks[duration]``           Duration in seconds of task that executed before failed task
======================================= ==============================================================

Commit message:

Remove execution date reference in docs
Not all usages can be removed, unfortunately, since there are still many
usages requiring the value, especially in Python APIs.

This also adds additional values for Sentry tags and Elastic log
filenames based on data interval instead of execution date, so the user
can migrate as soon as possible, even if we have not changed the default.

docs/apache-airflow/logging-monitoring/errors.rst, after:

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Error Tracking
===============

Airflow can be set up to send errors to `Sentry <https://docs.sentry.io/>`__.

Setup
------

First you must install sentry requirement:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install 'apache-airflow[sentry]'

After that, you need to enable the integration by set ``sentry_on`` option in ``[sentry]`` section to ``"True"``.

Add your ``SENTRY_DSN`` to your configuration file e.g. ``airflow.cfg`` in ``[sentry]`` section. Its template resembles the following: ``'{PROTOCOL}://{PUBLIC_KEY}@{HOST}/{PROJECT_ID}'``

.. code-block:: ini

    [sentry]
    sentry_dsn = http://foo@sentry.io/123

.. note::
    If this value is not provided, the SDK will try to read it from the ``SENTRY_DSN`` environment variable.

You can supply `additional configuration options <https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/python/configuration/options>`__ based on the Python platform via ``[sentry]`` section.
Unsupported options: ``integrations``, ``in_app_include``, ``in_app_exclude``, ``ignore_errors``, ``before_breadcrumb``, ``before_send``, ``transport``.

Tags
-----

======================================= ==================================================
Name                                    Description
======================================= ==================================================
``dag_id``                              Dag name of the dag that failed
``task_id``                             Task name of the task that failed
``data_interval_start``                 Start of data interval when the task failed
``data_interval_end``                   End of data interval when the task failed
``operator``                            Operator name of the task that failed
======================================= ==================================================

For backward compatibility, and additional tag ``execution_date`` is also available the represent the logical date. The tag should be considered deprecated in favour of ``data_interval_start``.


Breadcrumbs
------------

When a task fails with an error `breadcrumbs <https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/python/enriching-events/breadcrumbs/>`__ will be added for the other tasks in the current dag run.

======================================= ==============================================================
Name                                    Description
======================================= ==============================================================
``completed_tasks[task_id]``            Task ID of task that executed before failed task
``completed_tasks[state]``              Final state of task that executed before failed task (only Success and Failed states are captured)
``completed_tasks[operator]``           Task operator of task that executed before failed task
``completed_tasks[duration]``           Duration in seconds of task that executed before failed task
======================================= ==============================================================
